THREE
Motivation: The Engine of Your Child’s Growth
WANT TO LEARN the key to teaching your child new skills and facilitating
learning?
I thought you might.
If joining is the right hand of The Son-Rise Program, motivation is the
left hand. You need to join in order to get your child to a place where she is
ready to learn and grow, and motivation is the lever you use to get the
learning and growth to happen once she is ready.
Before we dive into the motivation principle and how to utilize it, it’s
important that we talk about the problems and pitfalls of the conventional
way that children on the autism spectrum are taught.
THE TIMING PROBLEM
The biggest mistake we make is attempting to teach or challenge our kids
when they are not in a state where they can take in new information. When
your child is, for instance, isming, not giving you eye contact, not
responding when you speak to him or call his name, he is giving you a red
light. (We’ll talk much more about red lights and green lights in Chapter
12.) When you try to teach, cajole, or enlist your child while he is giving
you a red light, you are “running a red.” When you’re driving, and you run
a red light, you might think you’ll get to your destination more quickly, but,
oftentimes, the result is quite different—maybe a fender bender, maybe
sitting on the side of the road getting a ticket. Likewise, when you’re with
your child, you might run a red, thinking that you’ll get where you want to
go with him faster. However, the result here is also the opposite.
It is crucial to wait until your child is ready and available before doing
any teaching or challenging. We call these windows of availability green
lights. (Again, this will be reintroduced later.) If your child is not isming
and is looking at you and responsive, you probably have a green light. That
is the time for teaching or asking for something from him. (You’ll get more
of these windows of availability if you join consistently, by the way.)
When we challenge our children at the correct times, the speed of
learning and quality of interaction is drastically accelerated. You really will
not believe how much it will pay off to follow your child’s learning
schedule rather than yours or anyone else’s.
THE MOTIVATION MISMATCH
Motivation is the engine of growth. It is the single largest factor in your
child’s learning and progress. When a child is following his or her own
intrinsic interests and motivations, learning comes fast and furious.
Fortunately, very few people will fight you on this idea; there is widespread
agreement on the importance of each child’s motivation. Unfortunately, the
motivation principle is rarely, if ever, put into practice with any consistency
—especially with children on the autism spectrum.
Ninety-nine percent of the time, our children are taught in a way that
works “against the grain” and slows down their learning. They are taught
according to the schedule, curriculum, and dictates of the adults who are
teaching them.
At home, the adults usually decide what activities will occur (bathtime,
learning, eating, playtime) and how they will transpire (with what toys,
food, silverware, games, books). In a school classroom, this system of
adults choosing the what and the how is even more prevalent. Even the best,
most dedicated, most talented teachers cannot possibly customize their
teaching to every child’s individual motivation when they face a roomful of
students, each of whom has sharply divergent interests.
To add to the mismatch, children on the autism spectrum tend to have
unusual and esoteric interests in the first place. What neurotypical children
find motivating rarely interests children on the spectrum. Therefore,
traditional modes of teaching will hardly ever be motivating to these
children.
The end result is that the manner in which our kids are taught is not
matched to what they find motivating and interesting. A child is asked to sit
down at a table and fill out a worksheet. But it turns out that she likes Star
Wars themes—and could be easily engaged in an activity involving Darth
Vader or the Millennium Falcon. A child is told to say two new words in a
certain order (for no reason that he can fathom). And yet, he might love to
be chased—and might be happy to say “chase me” or “run fast” in the
context of a chasing game.
A little girl is asked to count to five by counting black circles on a piece
of paper. But she loves dinosaurs. Wouldn’t she learn to count faster if we
played a game with dinosaurs where she had to count out five dinosaurs that
she wanted?
When we talk about the principle of using each child’s intrinsic
motivations, what we mean is this: customize the presentation of the
curriculum (i.e., anything you are helping your child to do or learn) to
match your child’s highest areas of interest.
The books The Brain That Changes Itself and The Art of Changing the
Brain point out that if you really want to change the brain—put the brain in
a maximum growth state and foster the most learning—the key is to find
and capitalize on the interests and motivations that a person already has, not
to force-feed someone information or try to “make” someone motivated.
When a child or adult is excited and motivated, neurotransmitters are
secreted that act to turn on the brain, priming it for growth, change, and
learning.
You want to introduce every skill you want your child to learn, every
educational goal you have, every new activity you want your child to try
within games or activities that are built around what your child already
finds motivating and interesting.
PITFALLS OF THE REWARD PRINCIPLE
It is usually at this point that schoolteachers or therapists will say to me,
“We’re already using this technique—have been for years. We find
something that each child likes—say, m&m’s or a favorite toy—and we use
these things as rewards to get the children to do something that we are
trying to help them do or learn.”
To be clear, using rewards is the exact opposite of the motivation
principle, but we’ll get to that in a bit.
For now, it is important to understand that the reward principle is the
single most widely used teaching technique in the entire world when it
comes to children with autism. (I am using the term “reward principle” here
for clarity and simplicity. It is not an academic or technical term.) I’m sure,
without even meeting you, that your child has been worked with using the
reward principle. And there is nothing remotely strange about this.
Everybody looooves the reward principle. Hey, it’s awesome! It gets our
kids to do stuff! Why wouldn’t we love it?
Without question, there are definitely a sizable number of our kids who
will do something we want them to do when we offer them the right
rewards. However, doing this comes with some pretty huge side effects.
Detrimental Desserts
Look, if you offer me chocolate, my first reaction is chocolate: me likey.
And I’m not exaggerating when I say that I really like chocolate. I like
things covered in chocolate. Things with chocolate in them. Things made
out of chocolate. Did I mention chocolate?
I tell you this to make a larger point (and to plant the seeds now, in case
you’re thinking of buying me a gift). If you stick a plate of broccoli in front
of me, I’m not going to beat down any doors to get at it. Don’t get me
wrong. I have a healthy respect for broccoli, and I do eat it, but it’s not my
favorite thing in the world. Truth is, I eat it purely out of some twisted sense
of biological obligation.
Now, if you tell me that if I finish that plate of broccoli in front of me,
you’ll give me a bowl of double chocolate ice cream with hot fudge and
chocolate-covered peanuts, then we’re in business. I will probably finish the
broccoli.
But what happens when you don’t have any chocolate to offer me?
Did offering me that dessert magically transform me into a vegetableloving
health nut? Will I now scarf down any plate of broccoli that crosses
my path?
Heck no! Unless you cover every plate of broccoli from here to eternity
in a pound of chocolate, good luck! But let’s take a closer look at why this
is, because it goes to the heart of how all human beings—including our kids
—operate.
When we set up the reward system, we are basically saying this: “Listen,
if you do this awful, terrible thing that you can’t stand, I’ll give you this
wonderful reward! In fact, the only reason to do what I’m asking is for the
reward.”
(Interestingly, a growing body of research—explained in books such as
Drive, The Medici Effect, and The Upside of Irrationality—shows that, in
business, offering people financial rewards such as a monetary bonus ahead
of time for doing a task that requires thought and learning actually causes a
decrease in performance!)
Think about it. We are a nation of people that love fattening, sugar-laden
treats. But most of us grew up with loving parents who coaxed (or
compelled) us to eat our vegetables. What the heck happened? Well, we
grew up with the reward principle—at least in the food category. We were
told that if we ate our vegetables, we would get to eat our delicious dessert.
Sure, we ate our veggies when we had to, but, in most cases, we came to
see the healthy stuff as the gross, obligatory food that we had to “get
through” in order to get to the “good stuff,” which was the fatty, sugary
poison we call dessert.
In fact, the very idea of dessert conjures up notions of the good-tasting
sweet reward following the meal. Why do we need the reward? Why isn’t
the meal enough? If we saw the meal as delicious and truly satisfying in its
own right, it would be enough.
This is the exact scenario that children on the spectrum are presented
with, except they are presented with it for everything. Nothing is too big or
small to warrant a reward. And the less our children seem to want to do
something, the bigger the reward they get for doing it.
The net result of all of this arrangement is that they grow to hate doing
the very things we are endeavoring to get them to do on their own. Sure,
they’ll do it (some of the time), but now they’re doing it only for the
reward.
This is especially problematic for our special group of children because
we are, in essence, telling them: “Let’s get through this stinky human
interaction crud, and then you can get the good stuff.” But the thing is, we
want the human interaction to be the good stuff! That’s our children’s only
ticket out!
If you are the parent of a neurotypical teenaged girl, you don’t have to
offer her a reward to get her to talk on the phone with her friends. (You may
have to reward her to get her off the phone.) Why? Because for her, talking
on the phone with her friends (human interaction, socialization, and
interpersonal relating) is the reward. It is the good stuff. That’s where we
want our special kids to be!
Robotic Behavior
One of the most common complaints I hear from parents with respect to the
reward principle is that, yes, their children do perform some useful
behaviors, but that they do so in a way usually described as “robotic.” Their
children may put the puzzle together or ask, “How are you today?” or shake
a person’s hand when prompted, but they do so in a programmed manner
without any apparent joy or spontaneity.
In fact, many of these parents have been told that robotic behavior is a
key symptom of autism. And, indeed, many children on the spectrum do
appear this way. However, in our experience, robotic behavior, devoid of
joy or spontaneity, is not a symptom of autism. Rather, it is a symptom of
the way we teach children with autism. It is a symptom of the widespread
and excessive use of the reward principle.
James, though he is still on the autism spectrum, does not have robotic
behaviors. When my niece, Jade, was autistic, she did not have robotic
behaviors. When I had autism, I did not exhibit robotic behaviors. At the
Autism Treatment Center of America, we have worked with many children
who did not display robotic behavior. Robotic behavior is not ubiquitous in
Son-Rise Program children. The motivation principle is not a magic cureall,
but one thing it does not do is produce robotic behaviors.
